---
cip: 120
title: Multiple Pubsub Topics
author: Joel Thorstensson <joel@3box.io>
discussions-to: https://forum.ceramic.network/t/cip-120-multiple-pubsub-topics/
status: Review
category: Core
created: 2022-12-13
edited: 2022-12-13
---

## Simple Summary
<!--Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the CIP.-->
Make the Ceramic protocol use multiple pubsub topics to gossip updates.


## Abstract
<!--A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.-->

This CIP introduces the idea of separating into multiple pubsub topics based on a separator field in a streams genesis event, creating a unique pubsub topic for each value of this separator key. For streams that don't specify this field, the current pubsub topic is used for backwards compatibitliy.


## Motivation
<!--Motivation is critical for CIPs that want to change the Ceramic protocol. It should clearly explain why the existing protocol specification is inadequate to address the problem that the CIP solves. CIP submissions without sufficient motivation may be rejected outright.-->
Currently Ceramic uses one pubsub topic to propagate *update*, *query*, and *response* messages in the network. As the network grows the scalability of this approach will be limited. Separating messages into multiple topics doesn't neccessarily solve this problem entirely. However, it allows developers of less popular streams to not share the burden of message propagation for more scaled applications.


## Specification
<!--The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature.-->

This CIP proposes a way to create a pubsub topic for any given stream given a *separator key* and a *separator value*. The *separator key* is defined by the `sep` field in the genesis event header and must be a string. The *separator value* is defined as the value of the field in the genesis header corresponding to the value of `sep`. The *separator value* is expected to be a byte string.

All pubsub messages for streams that include a value for the `sep` field in the genesis header MUST use the following topic:

```markdown
/ceramic/<network-name>/sep/<separator-key>/<separator-value>
```

- `network-name` - the name of the Ceramic network used
- `separator-key` - the value of the `sep` separator key field
- `separator-value` - the value of the field specified by the `sep` field, encoded as `base36`

### Example

If a stream has the following genesis header,

```javascript
{
  header: {
    sep: 'model',
    model: toBytes('k2t6wyfsu4pg1hnttc39koxlw0pdn1kemzrn33cdfhrbooozvo7wb14sa1uqwi', 'base36'))
  },
  ...
}
```

it would use the following pubsub topic on main net:

```markdown
/ceramic/mainnet/sep/model/k2t6wyfsu4pg1hnttc39koxlw0pdn1kemzrn33cdfhrbooozvo7wb14sa1uqwi
```

### Streams without `sep`

For backwards compatibility if a stream doesn't have a `sep` field or no value for the field specified by `sep`,  will use the following pubsub topic:

```markdown
/ceramic/<network-name>/
```

Which is the pubsub topic currently used by Ceramic.

### Peer discovery

While gossipsub used by Ceramic enables ambient discovery of peers, an initial set of peers already in a topic is required to recieve messages. It is therefore recommended that peers announce to the libp2p DHT that they are subscribed to a given pubsub topic. Peers can thus also discover other peers by looking up the DHT records for the given topic. The key that should be used for DHT providing and lookup MUST be `sha2-256(topic-name)`.


## Rationale
<!--The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.-->
By separating tip gossip into multiple pubsub topics, each node only needs to hear about a smaller subset of messages. Each node will subscribe only to the topics that are relevant for the streams it currently cares about.


## Backwards Compatibility
<!--All CIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The CIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. CIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility section may be rejected outright.-->

There are two approaches for how to transition to this new approach for pubsub topics.

### Duplicate messages

For a transition period new nodes will publish updates in both the old main topic as well as the new topic. This ensures backwards compatibility in the system at the cost of some amount of time with, at worst, double the amount of messages.

### Force an upgrade (recommended)

Almost like a hard fork we can pick a particular blockheight (since we track the eth blockchain), or blocktimestamp. Once this time has passed all nodes would switch over to the new pubsub topics (with maybe a short phase out period). The main drawback of this approach is that the community would need to coordinate to upgrade their software in time. There would be no backwards compatibility for nodes that didn’t make the upgrade.


## Implementation
<!--The implementations must be completed before any CIP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the CIP is accepted.-->
No implementation yet.


## Security Considerations
<!--All CIPs must contain a section that discusses the security implications/considerations relevant to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for security discussions, surfaces risks and can be used throughout the life cycle of the proposal. E.g. include security-relevant design decisions, concerns, important discussions, implementation-specific guidance and pitfalls, an outline of threats and risks and how they are being addressed. CIP submissions missing the "Security Considerations" section will be rejected. An CIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Security Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.-->
The proposed use of the DHT for peer discovery opens Ceramic up for eclipse attacks. However, due to the use of libp2p gossipsub's ambient peer discovery, the effects of this is minimal.


## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
